well let's recap again all of the latest
developments we've been hearing out of
Israel and the occupied territories the
expected exchange of a second group of
Israeli captives and Palestinian
Prisoners has apparently been delayed
the military wing of Hamas says the
exchange won't happen until Israel
adheres to the ceasefire agreement
reached between the two sides and allows
allows Aid trucks to enter Northern Gaza
Maan bishara is Al's senior political
analyst and joins me again here in the
studio Maran
these are incredibly sensitive moments
aren't they we've all been on the
lookout for the potential stumbling
blocks the tension points in this
complex choreography now potentially
something is a foot a delay in the
Handover of captives we thought it was
underway Hamas now saying no no we're
holding on to them because Israel hasn't
adhered to the terms of the deal in
sending Aid to Northern Gaza what is
happening at the moment behind the
scenes to try and resolve this how is
how are they even contacting each other
how are they even talking about this
well my understanding is that the
qataris now are directly involved uh in
what is going on and probably not just
here it's also over
there but also uh there's clear
violations apparently of the uh of the
agreement and I think one of the things
I've seen which I think probably would
uh invoke or provoke uh Hamas into
taking such a decision and that is that
the aid is not reaching Northern Gaza I
mean the fact that this whole entire
Enterprise I'm talking about the deal
was made in order to release few
prisoners in the West Bank and
Jerusalem that's a bit of a thin one
right considering that the entire West
Bank is held hostage to Israel and that
it just held uh arrested imprisoned some
3,000 Palestinians right so the issue
issue for Hamas in Gaza is about the
humanitarian Aid and they agreed on to
300 trucks a day but clearly something
is happening with that that's not well
especially the idea of that Aid reaching
those who need it most most in the north
now why are there a lot of people still
or some people still still in the north
I've seen one image today that for me
give me the clear answer young
man mandates all over but walking around
with tubes out of him with someone
carrying the whatever it is that they do
for whatever reason and walking from the
north to the South because there are no
ambulances to take him I can imagine
that there are countless number of sick
people old people and other kinds of
people who just cannot make it to the
South those people are in bad need of
anything from drinking water to food
well M mads Gilbert we just heard him
there talked about the north the needs
in the north he said there is not a
single remaining functioning medical
facility half a million people there
many of them in extreme need patients
still stuck in those non-functioning
hospitals and no Aid reaching absolutely
and one
wonders about uh about the um about the
functionality of those hospitals moving
forward because my understanding is that
contrary to the images that we've seen
the Israelis presumably bringing new
equipment that apparently the hospital
didn't need at the time 2 7th of October
now we hear Palestinian reports about uh
about the Israeli military ransacking
the hospitals I mean clearly the message
here uh Jonah is that the Israelis don't
want to leave anything functional they
want to destroy the entire Civic
structure in Northern Gaza perhaps later
Southern Gaza in order to make it
uninhabitable unlivable they just want
to make sure that people simply will not
be able to bear living anymore in the
north so when we talk about Collective
punishment as a war crime when we talk
about Collective punishment as genocide
when we talk about the unraveling
genocide that's what we mean starving
people rendering people unable even to
drink water and we just saw the reports
about diarrhea now we're talking about
tens of thousands of any such cases
that's just incredulous the idea that
Israel could with such impunity
under the cover of the deal to be able
to continue to carry arrests in the West
Bank to continue to starve people in
Gaza right that's certainly a violation
of some sort it's first and foremost for
me as an
analyst it's a violation of basic human
decency basic human decency let alone
violation of international law War crime
Collective punishment and so on so forth
and it's certainly a violation of the
deal if the deal is to to let Aid into
Gaza Maran it was striking listening to
an interview conducted earlier by Nita
Ibrahim uh at the uh outside offer
prison where a gentleman described the
ceasefire deal as a victory for the
Palestinian resistance we've heard
similar sentiments from the Israeli side
who want to portray this ceasefire deal
as their Victory they have subdued Gaza
they have brought Hamas to heal and
forced them to release some captives
both both sides claiming Victory you
talked about the point of this ceasefire
deal what are the interests of both
sides in preserving this ceasefire you
know it's interesting that you say both
sides and we need we need to dissect
that what do we mean by both sides right
because clearly the interests of the
captives is not anymore the interest of
the Netanyahu government in fact it
wasn't from the very beginning we know
for a fact that Hamas did consider those
uh captives at least the hostage
civilian amongst them that they were
guests and they wanted to get rid of
them as soon as possible and so Israel
did not go did not need to go through 40
plus days of warfare of war crimes in
order to get those released because
Hamas wanted to get them released for
minimum uh uh requirements and and and
return what Hamas will insist on huge
return will be the release of the
soldiers that's a whole other game but
the release of foreigners and and and
Tha and and and and and Tha workers and
and old people and young people Hamas
wanted to do that from the beginning so
Israel's claim that it's only under the
pressure of war that Hamas wanted to
release that that's humbug two I think
Hamas can declare political
political uh achievement in this deal
because it prove to the world one that
it's still capable after 50 days of war
crimes to to have a have a command over
its militants be able to ensure the
safety and the well-being of the
hostages the captives and I was just
reading this is probably important for
our viewers around the world who don't
read Hebrew I was just reading a Hebrew
website Walla in Israel the main website
in Hebrew and Israel reporting about the
relatives of the uh released hostages
captives from Israel and those are
relaying what their family members who
were held by Hamas are saying and their
testimony is that those uh captives were
very well treated throughout their uh
almost 50 days of captivity with the
exception with the very few hours until
they were brought into Gaza later on it
seems like they were actually treated
like guests and the entire Israeli
hasbara the entire Israeli Public
Relation deception from the the
decapitation of babies through the you
know the evil that's going to befall
over the captives that's all is proving
once again to be just that propaganda
and it is totally untrue so in a sense
Hamas was able to reveal certain things
and was able to withhold withand
steadfast you know Vis A V the the
Israeli aggression but the people of
Gaza paid a huge price for this Hamas
might want to declare temporary Victory
but no the people of Gaza are not
Victorious today the people of Gaza were
not party to this necessarily the people
of Gaza are innocent unlike what the
Israeli President
says very hard to see what Hamas does
with any political Capital it may gain
in any of this we can talk about that
later perhaps thanks Mar